Implement Workspaces GUI (#15946)
jupyterlab/jupyterlab: docs/source/user/workspaces.rst

.. Copyright (c) Jupyter Development Team.
.. Distributed under the terms of the Modified BSD License.

.. _workspaces:

Workspaces
==========

> A JupyterLab Workspace defines the layout and state of the user interface such as the position of files, notebooks, sidebars, and open/closed state of the panels.

Author: Comment from @JasonWeill which I mistakenly deleted while preparing my reply to it :facepalm: 

> We should indicate that a workspace name may only contain ASCII letters a-z, A-Z, and digits 0-9 (regex "word" characters) and hyphens. [#14340](https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyterlab/issues/14340) was a bug related to Chinese text handling because we incorrectly relied on "word" characters being used, exclusively, globally, in filenames.

Author: Done in 6459bc05f21581966736ee13d754b50dc9904bf6.

Workspaces can be managed in three ways:

- :ref:`via Graphical User Interface <workspaces-gui>`
- :ref:`via Command Line Interface <workspaces-cli>`
- :ref:`via URL schema and parameters <url-workspaces>`

.. _workspaces-gui:

Managing Workspaces (GUI)
-------------------------

A number of commands is available to manage workspaces from the main menu, sidebar, and command palette:

- `create-new`, `clone`, `rename`, `reset`, and `delete` act on the workspaces stored by on the server in :ref:`the dedicated location <workspaces-directory>`.
- `save`, `save as`, `import`, and `export` can load and store the workspace to/from the file system (contained within the Jupyter root directory); `save` will save the workspace to the most recently saved file.

> In the sidebar the current workspace is indicated with check mark (✓). A different workspace can be opened by clicking on the corresponding sidebar item. Opening context menu (right click) over the workspace item in the sidebar will present actions available for management of that workspace:

Author: Clicking on another workspace does not open it in a new browser tab or window. It opens it in the same tab. Which browser did you see the behaviour of opening in a new tab or window? For now I will leave that fragment out:

```suggestion
In the sidebar, in the "Running Terminals and Kernels" panel, under "Workspaces", the current workspace has a check mark (✓). Clicking on another workspace will open. Opening the context menu (right click) over the workspace item in the sidebar will present actions available for management of that workspace:
```

-------------------------

JupyterLab provides a command-line interface for workspace ``import`` and
``export``:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ # Exports the default JupyterLab workspace
  $ jupyter lab workspaces export
  {"data": {}, "metadata": {"id": "/lab"}}
  $
  $ # Exports the workspaces named `foo`
  $ jupyter lab workspaces export foo
  {"data": {}, "metadata": {"id": "/lab/workspaces/foo"}}
  $
  $ # Exports the workspace named `foo` into a file called `file_name.json`
  $ jupyter lab workspaces export foo > file_name.json
  $
  $ # Imports the workspace file `file_name.json`.
  $ jupyter lab workspaces import file_name.json
  Saved workspace: <workspaces-directory>/labworkspacesfoo-54d5.jupyterlab-workspace

The ``export`` functionality is as friendly as possible: if a workspace does not
exist, it will still generate an empty workspace for export.

The ``import`` functionality validates the structure of the workspace file and
validates the ``id`` field in the workspace ``metadata`` to make sure its URL is
compatible with either the ``workspaces_url`` configuration or the ``page_url``
configuration to verify that it is a correctly named workspace or it is the

> default workspace.

Author: Since this is pre-existing docs, I opened #16020 to track this.

Workspace File Format
---------------------

A workspace file in a JSON file with a specific spec.

There are two top level keys requires, `data`, and `metadata`.

The `metadata` must be a mapping with an `id`
key that has the same value as the ID of the workspace. This should also be the relative URL path to access the workspace,

> like `/lab/workspaces/foo`. Additionally, `metadata` may contain `created` and `last_modified` fields with date and time creation and most recent modification, respectively. The date and time are encoded using ISO 8601 format.

Author: Done in 8134d1f5f1e8759fb6d60104376e7e45b591d1df.

The `data` key maps to the initial state of the ``IStateDB``. Many plugins look in the State DB for the configuration.
Also any plugins that register with the ``ILayoutRestorer`` will look up all keys in the State DB
that start with the `namespace` of their tracker before the first ``:``. The values of these keys should have a `data`

> attribute that maps.

Reviewer: This is not clear. We should use "state database" as the shorthand for `IStateDB` (even though it is longer in characters, it is easier to read). Although this refers to "many plugins", it's not clear what a user would find important about this. The final sentence also trails off; it is not clear what is mapped to what.

For example, if your workspace looks like this:

.. code-block:: json

  {
    "data": {
      "application-mimedocuments:package.json:JSON": {
        "data": { "path": "package.json", "factory": "JSON" }
      }
    }
  }

It will run the `docmanager:open` with the ``{ "path": "package.json", "factory": "JSON" }`` args, because the `application-mimedocuments` tracker is registered with the `docmanager:open` command, like this:

.. code-block:: typescript

  const namespace = 'application-mimedocuments';
  const tracker = new WidgetTracker<MimeDocument>({ namespace });
  void restorer.restore(tracker, {
    command: 'docmanager:open',
    args: widget => ({
      path: widget.context.path,
      factory: Private.factoryNameProperty.get(widget)
    }),
    name: widget =>
      `${widget.context.path}:${Private.factoryNameProperty.get(widget)}`
  });

> Note the part of the data key after the first ``:`` (``package.json:JSON``) is dropped and is irrelevant.

Reviewer: This needs to be clarified or rewritten. The term "irrelevant" is very concerning in user documentation; clearly, the part after the first `:` is relevant to _something_ — why else would it be there?
